And now let's get to the last section for
today which has to do with JavaScript.
And I feel that this is possibly
the most exciting section because
that is the biggest revolution
that custom properties bring.
The fact that we can use just a tiny
bit of JavaScript to set them and
have the rest of the CSS just adapt.
Whereas previously,
we had to include like copious amounts of
CSS code mixed with our JavaScript,
it was such a mess.
So how can we set and
read some properties with JavaScript?
The exact same methods that we use for
regular properties.
This API has existed for possibly decades.
We just do element.style.getPropertyValue,
and
that gives us the value of foo on
the inline style of the element.
Or if we want to get the value
of foo from wherever,
even if it comes from a style sheet,
we get the computed
style of the element and
then we use the same method name.
And most importantly,
this is what we're gonna be doing a lot
when we want to set a custom
property on the inline style.
We just do element.style.setProperty and
we set the custom property
to whatever we want.
And that sets it on the inline style,
but that's usually what we want,
we don't usually want to be
actually modifying style sheets.
So what can we do with this?
Let's look at a few examples.
So here we have a radial gradient whose
center is hard coded to the center of
the page.
We wanted to, instead, do a spotlight
effect that follows the mouse,
we want its center to change
to follow our mouse pointer.
So how can we do that?
In the past,
we would need to use an event listener for
mouse move and
recreate the gradient every time.
However, today we can just
set two custom properties
So we're going to set --mouse-x and
--mouse-y to evt.clientX and evt.clientY.
And then, We can go here and use,
well, we can't get just
to use mouse x directly,
we need to transform it first,
cuz right now we just have a number.
So we multiply it by 1 pixel.
Right, and
we also need to provide a fallback.
Let's say zero.
And now, as I move my mouse pointer,
the gradient does adapt horizontally.
We can do the same vertically.
Oops, calc.
And now it adapts in both directions.
However, this is not ideal.
Even though this already gives us a big
advantage over what we would have
to do before custom properties,
it's not sufficiently usable.
And let's see why.
So let's go back to this SVG example.
Let's say we wanted to set this look
variable, remember it goes from 0 to 1,
in terms of the mouse pointer so
that we could move our mouse pointer and
have the eyes appear to follow it,
wouldn't that be cool?
But how do you convert this number
of pixels to a 0 to 1 range?
Even though what we said is a pure number,
it's actually a fake pure number because
it essentially corresponds to pixels and
we can't really do much with it.
So what can we do instead?
Instead of having a number of pixels,
we could actually divide the number of
pixels with the maximum number
of pixels we could have.
Which is given by innerwidth or
window.innerwidth as we might have
seen it, it's the same thing.
So what does this give us?
This gives us the percentage
of the screen of the viewport
that the mouse pointer has moved
horizontally and dividing by inner height.
Gives us the percentage that the mouse
pointer has moved across the viewport
vertically.
And that means we can use it
just the same in everything that
needs to use the mouse pointer, so
here we can just set look based on that.
Let's default it as well, in fact,
let's give it a fullback of 0.5,
and look at that.
It already worked.
And the biggest advantage
of this is that it works
regardless of the CSS code
that we intend to use it in.
We can take exactly
the same JavaScript code,
copied into our previous example,
Let's press Cmd+Enter to run.
And if we multiply it by 100%, and
here as well, it works for this as well.
In fact it works better because instead of
having pixels here we have percentages.
So the exact same JavaScript code can
serve two entirely different use cases.
This is very important when designing
how you're gonna use custom
properties to communicate
between JavaScript and CSS.
And it becomes even more important if
there are different people writing the CSS
code and
different people writing the JavaScript.
You don't want to have to go back to
the JavaScript developer every time you
wanna tweak the design of your gradient,
or
every time you want to make a minor
tweak on some kind of effect.
You want to offload as much of
the styling as possible to CSS.
You want to JavaScript to just send
the very purest form of data so
you can just iterate as much as you
want in your CSS without having to
go back to the JavaScript and
change JavaScript code.
That is the ideal separation of concerns.
Now there are some things that
we can do by having mouse-x and
mouse-y that apply to the whole page,
but sometimes we want local coordinates.
So how could we do that?
And this is a summary of how we can
do reusable pointer coordinates.
So you should prefer abstract 0 to 1
percentages rather than absolute pixel
lengths.
0 to 1 can be converted to a length,
if you want,
you can always multiply it by
viewport units, for example.
But the reverse isn't possible if you have
pixels even if you have pixels as a pure
number, you can't do anything with them.
So what about local coordinates?
While having coordinates that apply
to the percentage of the viewport
that the mouse coordinate
design is useful.
Often we wanna do things that depend
on the percentage of an element
itself that the pointer is over.
It's relatively easy to get
local pointer coordinates,
all we need to do is get the bounding
rectangle of the element.
And then subtracted from client y and
client x, and
then we get local coordinates for
the element itself.
And in the same spirit has previously,
instead of having pixels cuz that's
what top and left would give us,
we wanna divide by the width and
height of the actual elements.
So we could get a 0 to 1 percentage
that we could actually use for
calculations in our CSS.